---
layout: post
title:  "Dockers 101"
date:   2023-02-21 19:59:44 +0300
categories: jekyll update
---

**Contents**
* TOC
{:toc}
## General

This page summerizes key docker-insights. 

## Launch

```bash
docker run --name repo alpine/git clone https://github.com/docker/getting-started.git 
docker cp repo:/git/getting-started/ .
```

The first command, `docker run` launches a new container, and names it as `repo`. \
The container image is fetched from [docker-hub][docker-hub], and named `alpine/git`. \
Note that containers may be also launched from docker-image tags, as created by `docker build`. 

Its sole goal is to run `git` within a container. \
The git command fetches the docker tutorial github repo. 

Note that a container can be run in background, via `-d` flag. \
Moreover, container's ports may be published towards the host, via `-p 127.0.0.1:80:8080/tcp` . \
This binds container port `8080` to TCP port `80` on `127.0.0.1` of the host machine. \
Note that ports must not be bound to the host, and may be accessible from outside, for example `-p 80:80`.

The second command, `docker cp`, copies files and directories from the docker container towards the host. 

## Build

Docker image is a private file-system for a single container. \
It provides all the files and code the container needs [docker-build][docker-build].

Image can be built according to a `dockerfile`, via `docker build`: 

```bash
docker build -t docker101tutorial .
```

The above command's `PATH` is equals to `.`, and defines the subset of files the build may refer to. \
This means ALL  files in the current directory get `tar`d and sent to the docker daemon. 

Note that `.dockerignore` file may be used, for example to ignore uploading redundant files such as the `.git` directory. 

Note the usage of `-t` (tag): `docker build -t repo_name:2.0`, means the image name will be `repo_name`, and its tag `2.0`. \
A single image may have multiple tags. \
A common pick is the `latest` tag. 

## Stop

We can get the ID of running containers by `docker ps`. 

Then, we can stop a running container by `docker stop <container-id>`.

Finally, after the container have stopped, we can remove it using `docker rm <container-id>`. \
Note we can stop and remove a container in a single command via `docker rm -f <container-id>`. 

## Exec

We can execute a command on a running container via `docker exec`:

```bash
docker exec -it <container-id> sh
```

In this case, we eould execute the command `sh`, which would yield us a shell. \
Moreover, note the usage of `-it` for an `--interactive` + `--tty` session. 

## Dockerfile

A script of instructions, that is used to create a container image. \
The project's source must contain a file named `Dockerfile`. 

Example of a simple dockerfile:

```dockerfile
FROM node:18-alpine
WORKDIR /app
COPY . .
RUN yarn install --production
CMD ["node", "./src/index.js"]
```

The builder states the build should continue from the `node:18-alpine` image, using the `FROM` keyword. \
That way, we can have some previous good starting point, instead of building everything from scratch. 

The `WORKDIR` instruction sets the working directory for any following instruction. \
This basically sets a "root jail" within the files that would be uploaded to the docker container from the host. 

The `COPY` instruction copies files from the host towards the container. \
Thereafore, the above instruction copies all content of the `/app` directory within the host towards the container. 

The `RUN` instruction allows execution of bash commands. \
Note that this is an image build step. Usually we would install packages that are required by the application via `RUN`. 

`CMD` is the command that the container executes by default, when the built image is finnaly launched. Note it can be used as multiple forms: explicit `array` (preferred format), and `shell`. \
It can only be called once within a dockerfile. 

## Docker Image Sharing

Docker images are shared within the Docker Hub. 

The image is pushed towards the server via:

```bash
docker push MY_USERNAME/getting-started
```

The image name must be tagged, via `docker tag` command:

```bash
docker tag getting-started MY_USERNAME/getting-started
```

Note we can see all created docker images via `docker image ls`. 

## Persisting Data

Container starts from the image definition each time it starts. \
Those changes are lost when the container is removed, and all changes are isolated to this specific container. 

`volumes` provide the ability to connect specific filesystem paths of the container back to the host machine. \
We can mount a directory within the container, so that changes would be seen also on the host machine. \
That way, upon container restarts, the directory would persist. 

### Named Volumes

For example, SQLite uses a single file as its DB. \
We can persist that file on the host, and make it available to the next container. 

Named volume is just "bucket of data". \
Docker maintains the physical location on the disk, and assigns this volume a name. 

Create volume named `todo-db` via:

```bash
docker volume create todo-db
```

Now, we can specify the volume mount via `-v` flag:

```bash
docker run -dp 3000:3000 -v todo-db:/etc/todos getting-started
```

That way, we've assigned the `todo-db` volume a persistant mount point on the host - `/etc/todos`. 

Note that named volumes are stored within an arbitrary mount point, we do not control. \
We can inspect it via `docker volume inspect todo-db`. 

### Bind Mounts

Allows us to control the mount point on the host machine. \
We can also use it to provide additional data into the containers. 

For example, we can mount our source code into the container, to let it see code changes right away. 

```bash
docker run -dp 3000:3000 \
    -w /app -v "$(pwd):/app" \
    node:18-alpine \
    sh -c "yarn install && yarn run dev"
```

`-w /app` sets the container working directory. \
`-v "$(pwd):/app"` makes a bind mount of the host's `$(pwd)` towards the container's `/app` (requires absolute paths). \
`node:...` stands for the image to use. \
`sh -c "..."` is the command to be executed. 

## Docker Compose

Tool that was developed to ease the defining and sharing of multi-container applications. 

This is a single file, `docker-compose.yml`, that defines the multiple containers that run our application. 

The `services` attribute defines the contains we want to run as part of our application. \
Note it also automatically assigns the service name as a network alias. 

For example:

```bash
services:
  app:
    image: node:18-alpine
    command: sh -c "yarn install && yarn run dev"
    ports:
      - 3000:3000
    working_dir: /app
    volumes:
      - ./:/app
    environment:
      MYSQL_HOST: mysql
      MYSQL_USER: root
      MYSQL_PASSWORD: secret
      MYSQL_DB: todos

  mysql:
    image: mysql:8.0
    volumes:
      - todo-mysql-data:/var/lib/mysql
    environment: 
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: secret
      MYSQL_DATABASE: todos

volumes:
  todo-mysql-data:    
```

Note the `app` volume uses a static filesystem host->container mapping, whereas the `db` volume uses a named volume. \
The named volume needs to be stated explicitly within the compose file.

The application can be runned via `docker compose up -d`, and stopped via `docker compose down`. \
Its logs can be inspected via `docker compose logs -f`. 

## Logging

We can watch docker's logs via `docker logs -f <container-id>`. 

Moreover, we can look at how an image is composed, via `docker image history --no-trunc <id>`.

## Example - SonarCube

A popular and recommended static analysis tool is SonarCube. \
However, I really don't have the time or will to download all of its java-crap dependencies. 

Instead, i can use an already-existing docker machine, containing the analysis tool already installed:

```bash
sudo docker run -it --rm -v $(pwd):/tmp sonarsource/sonar-scanner-cli bash
```

Note I've mapped the current host working directory to the docker image's `tmp` folder. 

Also, run the sonarcube server in the background:

```bash
sudo docker run -d --rm --name sonarqube -e SONAR_ES_BOOTSTRAP_CHECKS_DISABLE=true -p 9000:9000 sonarqube:latest
```


[docker-hub]: https://hub.docker.com/r/alpine/git
[docker-build]: https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/build/
