---
layout: post
title:  "KDLP - Part 1"
date:   2024-06-30 19:59:45 +0300
categories: jekyll update
---

**Contents**
* TOC
{:toc}
## Lecture 6

This lecture deals with execution contexts, and syscalls internals in particular. \
For x86-32, the syscall request is being issued via `int 0x80`, hence involves dereference of `IDT[0x80]`. For x86-64, `syscall` is used. For arm64, `svc`. \
If we would issue `msr VBAR_EL1, x0` from userspace, the program shall crash with an "illegal instruction". `msr` reads from model-specific register, into the second operand, `x0` in this case. Indeed, `VBAR_EL1` serves as the specific reg - vector base address register, execution level 1. Hence, by trying to access a register that belongs to execution level 1 from userspace, the kernel terminates our process. 

### Execution Context

Just CPU registers state. Hence, context === all registers values. \
For example, `setjmp(3)` saves the current state of the program, while `longjmp(3)` restores it. \
Another example are usermode threads. Recall they share heap, code, data - while having their own stack and registers. 

### Kernelspace and userspace

The main difference is their privilege level. \
An important simplification - kernelspace execution context can be subdivided, to code that *runs on behalf of a particular userspace process*, or *code that runs on its own behalf* (for example, kthreads or interrupt handlers). \
Context switch is capture of the current CPU regs state, and load of the previously-saved CPU regs. \
Kernel context switch is just as a regular processes context switch, but also changes the privileges. 

### Re-entrancy

If multiple invocations of a function can safely run concurrently, it is considered as reentrant. \
On single threaded usermode, this term may be used within signal handlers. \
If there's at least one non-reentrant call within a function, it is considered as non-reentrant at all.


### task_struct

Linux's PCB, defined within `include/linux/sched.h`. \
Each `pid` is mapped to a unique `task_struct`. \
In particular, `current` denotes the `task_struct` of process in current execution context. Notice it can also refer to the currently running kernel thread. \
Moreover, we cant always rely on this - as there are kernel contexts that dont have any process attached. \
Its implementation is architecture-specific.

### pid, tid, tgpid

When we refer to kernelspace `pid`, we actually mean `tid` within userspace. When we refer to kernelspace `tgid`, we actually mean userspace `pid`. \
We can learn this by looking at `getpid, gettid` syscalls within `kernel/sys.c`, defined via `SYSCALL_DEFINE0` (as it takes 0 arguments). \
Interesting to note, is that `getpid` takes namespaces into account, as well as locking. If we would call `getpid` from a container (having `/bin/sh` as its initial process), we should get `pid = 1`. 

Why's there a distinguish between `pid` and `tgid` though? \
Before Linux 2.6, there were only `pid`s. We could share address space between processes via `clone`, which allowed thread-like behavior. However, these processes were too independent (no shared signals for example). Hence, `tgid` was introduced. It required both kernel and userspace changes: \
For userspace, C library was now hardened for concurrency, and introduced `tid` concept to subdivide `pid` (as the term `pid` was already used). \
For kernelspace, `tgid` concept was introduced, as threads were already implemented in the kernel. To implement group of threads, which is what processes are, `tgid` was used - which groups kernel `pid`s together. 

### Syscalls 

`strace` is an awesome tool, which traces system calls as well as signals. It can also show the resources limits of a process.  

We'd like syscalls to be both fast and secured. Spectre is an example of that tradeoff implications - speculating both sides of an `if` statement, a speed optimization, while leaving side channels implications (cache memory changes) that could lead to information disclosure. \
Moreover, we'd like them to be stable and re-entrant. The kernel code must be reentrant. 

Regarding security, userspace-kernelspace is a classic scenario of the "Confused deputy problem", where an unprivileged entity may perform requests towards some privileged entity. \
A classic example is using the exposed userspace's syscalls API, and sending arbitrary values for pointers arguments. The kernel have to validate the address range of any pointer arguments, and making sure that they belong to the requested process!

## Lecture 7

Deals with syscalls implementation on arm64 and x86-64. 

### Syscall Implementation

Userspace invocation, HW PE, kernel code handler, HW PD, userspace continuation. \
We can see `/proc/PID/syscall`, which is the current syscall and arguments a process is running. 

For usespace invocations, we usually use library wrappers, as provided by `libc`. This saves overhead of calls, and avoids arch specific details. We can use `ltrace` to trace library calls. \
Notice each arch have its own implementation of user library. For example, in order to use syscalls within arm64, we have to specific sysnum in `x8`, args in `x0-x5`, and `svc #0` to invoke it. For x86-64, this differs. 

HW privilege escalation on arm64 is performed via `__primary_switched`, which is called early on the kernel boot time. This function loads the vector table address into model-specific register `VBAR_EL1`. In a similar manner, x86-64 sets `MSR_LSTAR` to `entry_SYSCALL_64` address, within `syscall_init`. \
Notice exception levels on ARM are the reverse-order of privileges rings within x86. Both archs contains this level within an arch-specific register (`cs` in x86).

Most kernel handlers starts with some arch specific low-level asm and C macros. Higher on the stack, there's more generic code. \
Within arm64, HW jumps to a specific offset in `vectors`, as defined by `VBAR_EL1`. The "classic" entry would be sync 64-bit EL0 call (in case it was issued from userspace). This would trigger `el0t_64_sync_handler`, which would usually trigger `el0_svc`. This method does multiple interesting things, including the swap from usermode to kernelmode, arch specific stuff, execution of the syscall via `do_el0_svc`, and finally returning to userspace. Notice `do_el0_svc` actually loads the syscall table to `el0_svc_common`, which internally executes the call. \
For arm64, upon completion, the kernel returns via `ret_to_user`, which calls `kernel_exit 0`, which eventually calls `eret`. x86-64 uses `sysret` or `iret`. \
The kernel stores the real error code within `errno`, which is located at userspace thread-local memory area. 

## Lecture 8

BPF - BSD packet filter. Also deals with `bpftrace`. \
A way for the users to upload executable code to the kernel, and run it within the kernel. This code have to be verified. 

### ftrace

Mounted as tracefs, usually at `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing`. We can enable it as follows:

```bash
# Tracing is off
echo 0 > tracing_on
# Wipe the buffer
echo -n > trace
# Select function_graph tracer
echo function_graph > current_tracer
# Turn tracing on and off again
echo 1 > tracing_on
echo 0 > tracing_on
# Look at the trace, between enabling and disabling
vim trace
```

### BPF

Originally, used for a packet filter. \
Nowadays it stands for in-kernel general purpose VM. 
The main issue with modules, is that those are written in C, not having any verifications being performed on the imported kernel code. \
It uses verified JIT compilation from C to BPF to native code. 

### BPF Main Features

Tracing & observability, runtime verifications, as well as event-driven programming rather than task-driven (using probes). \
Safety, as when a module crashes - the kernel crashes. When a BPF crashes, nothing happens. 

Networking example is `XDP` (express data path) - optimizes network operations in kernel. \
Profiling example is `perf`, which also uses the BPF subsystem. 

### kprobes

Dynamic kernel code instrumentation. 

1. First byte of instruction can be replaced with breakpoint (similar to `ftrace`). At the beggining of functions to-be-instrumented, kernel code is compiled to have `noop` instructions, that can be replaced with `jmp`s at runtime (to some code snippet that stores information within a buffer), and jump back to continue the function's flow. 

2. For function return, uses `kretprobes`, which is a similar concept. 

For example, in order to trace `do_nanosleep`, defined at `kernel/time/hrtimer.c`, we'd first have to download `bpftrace` via `sudo dnf install -y bpftrace`, which now resides under `/bin/bpftrace`. \
Afterwards, we'd like to verify the available probes contains `kprobe:do_nanosleep`:

```bash
$ sudo bpftrace -l | grep do_nanosleep
kfunc:vmlinux:do_nanosleep
kprobe:do_nanosleep
```

Notice `kfunc` is a BPF kernel function, meaning it is exposed for use by BPF program, and is part of the `vmlinux` binary. See more of [this][kfuncs].

We shall install the following 2 probes, by executing `sudo ./nanosleep.bp`:

```bash
#!/bin/bpftrace

BEGIN {
    printf("Ahoy!\n");
}

kprobe:do_nanosleep {
    printf("PID %d (%s) sleeping\n", pid, comm);
}
```

Now we've actually installed an extra code snippet that would be executed upon every invocation of `do_nanosleep`! \
Notice we would do a similar probe tracing the return value, via `kretprobe:do_nanosleep`, denoted via `retval`. 

### uprobes

Userspace program instrumentation this time. \
For example, tracing bash's `readline` function, within `readline.bp`:

```bash
#!/bin/bpftrace

uprobe:/bin/bash:readline {
    printf("%s %d %s\n", comm, arg0, str(arg0));
}
```

### tracepoints

Statically defined, giving some stable interface. \
For example, compiling the kernel via `CONFIG_HAVE_SYSCALL_TRACEPOINTS`. \
Indeed, `SYSCALL_DEFINEx` contains a call for `SYSCALL_METADATA` macro, which wraps the code of the tracepoints invocation. \
We shall find the desired tracepoint:

```bash
$ sudo bpftrace -l | grep tracepoint | grep open
tracepoint:syscalls:sys_enter_openat
```

And install our probe:

```bash
#!/bin/bpftrace

tracepoint:syscalls:sys_enter_openat {
    printf("%d %s %s\n", pid, comm, str(args.filename));
}
```

### BCC

BPF compiler collection, set of many important tools and libraries. These are the "heavy guns" we'd use. \
For example, `opensnoop.py` is an optimized implementation of the above `open` tracing functionality. 

### bpftrace

Simple, lightweight option, less featured than `BCC`. \
For example, `bpftrace/tools/opensnoop.bt`. \
Its syntax is similar to `awk`. 

Notice we can use bpftrace maps, denoted by `@`, and used as key-value storage. \
For example, per-process syscall histogram:

```bash
#!/bin/bpftrace

tracepoint::raw_syscalls::sys_enter {
    @[comm] = count();
}
```

We can only assign the special function `count` to a map, which serves as an histogram method.

Another example, histogram of bytes read for a specific pid:

```bash
tracepoint::syscalls::sys_exit_read /pid == $1/
{
    @bytes = hist(args.ret);
}
```

We use `pid` as a filter. `bytes` serves as the named map. 

Another important feature of `bpftrace` is using the live stacks builtins - `kstack` and `ustack`. \
For example:

```bash
kprobe::ksys_read {
    printf("stack:%s\n", kstack);
}
```

Dumping the kernel / user stack layout. 

Notice: `bpftrace` reads on a per-cpu basis! Hence, messages may seem out-of-order. 

### BPF Compilation

A `bpftrace` program is compiled to AST, then to LLVM IR, and finally to BPF bytecode, which is JIT'ed to machine code. \
The bpf parser and lexer can be found under `bpftrace` repo. \
Interestingly, we can use `bpftrace -d` option, which also generates the AST and LLVM output. 

The load of the BPF program is actually being made using the `bpf` syscall, which receives within its first parameter a command code. For example, `BPF_PROG_LOAD`. 

### BPF JIT

All BPF programs are JITed. There used to be an option to interpret the program, without first compiling to machine code. It got removed for security reasons (and JIT is significantly faster..)

### In-kernel Verification

Hundreds of possible error returns, under `kernel/bpf/verifier.c`. 

We can see all of the currently-installed BPF programs via:

```bash
sudo bpftool prog show
```

We can also parse its translated bytecode via `prog dump xlated id <id>`.

### BPF - Kernel Entry Points

For example, `BPF_CALL_0(bpf_get_current_pid_tgid)`, called upon retrieving the `pid` or `tgid` from the added probe. \
Other interesting files to look at, are `include/uapi/linux/bpf.h` and `filter.h`, `bpf_common.h`. 

### `unlikely` macro

Compiler optimization macro (serves as an hint for branch). 
Defined within `include/linux/compiler.h`. 

### Further BPF reading

We can learn more about BPF by reading the bpftrace kselftests (good place to start contributing to the kernel), as well as reading the `BPF Performance Tools` book. 

## Lecture 9

Deals with interrupts implementation within the Linux kernel. 

### syzkaller

Open source project of Google. Automated running bots fuzz the kernel. Runs various tests on kernel patches, and produces automated crash reports.

### Assembly Macros

Recall we can invoke the C preprocessor via `cpp`. \
We can define assembly macros, for example:

```bash
.macro macro_svc, num
    svc #\num
.endm
```

Where `\num` is used in order to reference the argument. \
We can write assembly files containing both assembly and C macros. For example:

```c
#define FOO(bar) "Hello, " #bar "\n"

.macro do_syscall, number
do_syscall_\()\number:
    mov x8, #\number
    macro_svc 0
    ret
.endm
```

Where `#bar` is a stringify operator, and `\()` is concatenation operator. We can learn more about ARM assembly-level macro directives within [this link][assembly-macros]. \
Notice we can write both C and assembly macros, for example:

```c
#define MAKE_LABEL(foo) foo:
.macro do_syscall, number
MAKE_LABEL(do_syscall_\()\number)
    mov x8, #\number
    macro_svc 0
    ret
```

The C preprocessor, `cpp`, comes in first, and only then the assembler `as` operates, working on the preprocessor's output.

### Interrupts

An interrupt is a signal to the CPU to stop what its doing, and take care of urgent business. Why not polling? Terribly inefficient. Importance - Speed, and atomicity. \
By inspecting `/proc/interrupts`, we can see information, showing an histogram of the IRQ number for each CPU within the system. Level triggered interrupts are whenever the level of certain attribute passes some threshold value. Edge-triggered interrupts are going from 1 to 0 or vice versa, such as keyboard interrupts (pressing a button is `1`, when its unpressed - `0`). In addition to IRQs, this file shows IPIs - inter process interrupts. 

### Terminology

**x86 Terminology:** Interrupts refer to HW interrupts, which comes from an external source to the CPU, such as keyboard. Exceptions are referred as SW interrupts, for example the `int` instruction, such as `int 0x80`. \
Exceptions are actually split to 3 types: faults, traps and aborts. \
Traps are one type of SW interrupts (but they may refer to bunch of different things, depends on context - interrupts, SW interrupts, synchronous software interrupt, or debugger breakpoints), where the program returns to the NEXT instruction that have caused the trap. Faults return to the saved instruction, for a redo (such as page-fault). Aborts doesn't return to the program at all. 

**ARM Terminology:** Exceptions are any type of interrupt, interrpt refer to HW interrupt, abort refers to SW interrupt (x86 Exception). \
Reset: reinit the processor state. Moreover, some instructions are exception(interrupt)-generating instructions, such as the `svc`. 

### Tracing

We can easily trace interrupts via `bpftrace`:

```bash
#/bin/bpftrace

tracepoint:irq:irq_handler_entry {
    printf("Interrupt %d, %s", args->irq, kstack);
}

tracepoint:irq:irq_handler_exit {
    printf("Interrupt %d Finished. res:%d\n", args->irq, args->ret);
}
```

### Kernel Execution Context

As mentioned, there are few possible contexts for the kernel to be running at. \
For example, during a process context, the kernel running attached to a process. `current` refers to running process's `struct task_struct`. This context **allows** sleeping. 

Another possible context is **interrupt context**, where the kernel running is NOT attached to a process. There's no sleeping, nor blocking. This means we must pay attention to the functions we call within interrupt handlers, as they CANNOT block. \
The ISR (also denoted as the "top half"), interrupt service routine, is a very short and lightweight code, the critcial code taht must be run right away (not schedul-able) in an interrupt context, without blocking (allocations needs to be atomic, using `GFP_ATOMIC`), and with interrupt-disabled mode - meaning they're practically not preemptable. \
The "bottom half" is the "less important" stuff. These includes:

1. `softirq` - still runs in an interrupt context (can't block), starts immediately after the ISR (can't be scheduled), but this time with interrupts enabled, thus is preemptive.

2. `tasklet` - similar to softirq, but can be deferred(hence, now schedule-able). 

3. `workqueue` - even weaker version, now also having a process context and can sleep. Used for more extensive processing, for example, DMA operations, locks, etc. 

An an example, we can inspect the kernel thread `[ksoftirqd]`, which isn't attached to any process. \
Spurious interrupt is a term used to describe an interrupt that is uncleared where it came from. 

## Lecture 10

Kernel modules - introduction & API. 

### Kernel Modules

A kernel module is a mechanism added to the kernel - chunk of code that can be loaded in runtime. Device drivers provides interface to some device. \
Most modules written in C, but now can be written in Rust. ELF objects, ends with `.ko` suffix. Notice it isn't executable by itself (just like an `.so`), and since it serves as extra kernel code - not synchronous! Unlike BPF, modules code isn't verified, and can crash the kernel. \
Most modules are loaded during boot. Example usages (that are not device drivers) - multiple filesystem support, network protocol & crypto support, virtualization modules (`kvm`). \
We can inspect currently loaded modules via `lsmod`, which parses `/proc/modules`. This file contaisn the loaded modules, as well as their loaded address (displayed for root). Notice there's actually a dependency tree of modules, as we can see by the "Used By" attribute. The compiled modules are all stored within `/lib/modules/$(uname -r)`, via `make modules`, and the kernel binary is being linked to them via `make install`. \
Modules are an optional feature, and toggled in the compilation configuration. For example, by reading few kernel's `Kconfig` files, we can see there are 3 options for loading certain subsystem - `yes, no, module`. \
Modules may need to access the kernel's symbol table, and can also export its own symbols, via `EXPORT_SYMBOL`. Under the hood, it defines a new section, `.export_symbol`, and writes there inline-assembly format, describing the symbol. 

### In / Out Tree

In-tree: build a module during the kernel build process. We'd have to adapt `KConfig` files. For example, in order to build the `configs.ko` module, the relevant config file would have similar entry:

```bash
obj-$(CONFIG_IKCONFIG) += configs.o
```

Where the config option may be `y, n, m`. Modules would be `obj-m`, and `obj-y` would be builtin modules, compiled as part of the one big `vmlinux` binary. \
Out-of-tree: build modules as standalone units. Loading such module can mark the kernel as tainted. We can install dependencies to build modules for current kernel versions via `install kernel-devel-$(uname -r)`. 

### Loading, Unloading

1. `insmod` - insert module, based on `.ko` file path

2. `rmmod` - same as above, but removes a module

3. `modprobe {,-r}` - takes a module **name**, as it is within `/lib/modules/$(uname -r)`

Under the hood, these uses the various syscalls: 

1. `init_module` - loads a `struct module` to the kernel. `finit_module` is similar, but now based on a fd instead of path.

2. `delete_module` removes a module based on its name

If we would compile the kernel wih `CONFIG_IKCONFIG`, the kernel would compile its own config file into the kernel, exporting it to userspace view via procfs under `/proc/config.gz`. \
The loaded modules can be found under `/proc/modules`. Moreover, once loaded, we'd be able to inspect the module's symbols within `/proc/kallsyms`. 

## Lecture 11

### Sysfs

Unlike `/proc/modules`, which contains the dynamically-loaded modules (which were compiled with `m` option), under `/sys/modules`, we can see the loaded builtin modules. Notice that "real modules" also resides there, having more detailed information such as their sections memory mapping. 

### User Program Into Kernel Code

Instead of the regular libc headers, we'd use `<linux/module.h>`. As a memory allocator, we'd use `<linux/slab.h>`, and for handling with strings operations - `<linux/string.h>`. \
Moreover, the following kernel functions would be used:

```c
// User:
struct example *ex = malloc(sizeof *ex);
ex->message = strdup(msg);
printf("%s\n", ex->message);
free(ex->message);
err(1, "error occured");
// Kernel:
struct example *ex = kmalloc(sizeof *ex, GFP_KERNEL);
ex->message = kstrdup(msg, GFP_KERNEL);
pr_info("%s\n", ex->message);
kfree(ex->message);
printk(KERN_ERR "error occured");
```

`kmalloc` declaration located within `include/linux/slab.h`. According to its documentation, there are few possible allocation flags: `GFP_KERNEL` - regular kernel RAM allocation (may sleep), `GFP_NOWAIT` - where the allocation won't sleep, and `GFP_ATOMIC` - which won't sleep and may use emergency pools (useful within interrupt handlers). \
Also notice the error conventions - in order to report errors back to userspace, and distinguish them between userspace-made errors, the convention is for the kernel to set errno to negative values, such as `ret = -ENOMEM`. \
Moreover, notice `printk`'s argument, `KERN_ERR "error occured"`. C standard allows string concatenation, and indeed the symbol is resolved as: 

```c
#define KERN_SOH "\001"  // ASCII start of heading
#define KERN_ERR KERN_SOH "3"
```

Hence, the compiled binary shall have a slightly adapted cstring. The encoding prefix of octal escape sequence is valid - and according to `man 7 ascii`, denotes "start of heading". Using the `pr_*` equivalents are actually the preferred way, instead of `printk`. \
The following simple makefile can be served in order to build kernel module:

```bash
obj-m += kernel_code.o

.PHONY: build clean load unload

build:
	make -C /lib/modules/$(shell uname -r)/build modules M=$(shell pwd)
clean:
	make -C /lib/modules/$(shell uname -r)/build clean M=$(shell pwd)
load:
	sudo insmod kernel_code.ko
unload:
	-sudo rmmod kernel_code
```

### Slab Allocator Note

`kmalloc, kfree` defined under `linux/slab.h`. \
The Slab allocator uses "bins" of different sizes, as well as particular objects, called slabs, serving as a cache for allocations. We may inspect the slabs by reading `/proc/slabinfo`.  

## E1

Deals with syscall tracing using `bpftrace`. Most of the challenge is to RE a given program, and performing `strace` to find the goal syscall. \
The intersting part is writing a bpf script that traces invocation of the syscall only for the specified program, printing userspace and kernelspace stacks, as well as the call arguments. \
I've wrote the following simple C program:

```c
// noder.c
void *p = mmap((void *)0x77770000, 0x1000, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE | PROT_EXEC, MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_SHARED, -1, 0);
```

I've found the corresponding `mmap` kprobe using `sudo bpftrace -l | grep do_mmap`. \
The following script prints all of its relevant arguments, only for the `noder` program:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/bpftrace

BEGIN {
        printf("Debugging Syscall");
}

kprobe:do_mmap / comm == "noder" / {
        printf("PID %d (%s) do_mmap(file=%p, addr=%p, len=%d, prot=%d, flags=%d)\nkstack:%s\nustack:%s\n", pid, comm, arg0, arg1, arg2, arg3, arg4, kstack, ustack);
}
```

Having the output of:

```bash
PID 1759 (noder) do_mmap(file=(nil), addr=0x77770000, len=4096, prot=7, flags=33)
kstack:
        do_mmap+5
        vm_mmap_pgoff+236
        do_syscall_64+130
        entry_SYSCALL_64_after_hwframe+118

ustack:
        0x7f37fdfc126c
        0x401153
        0x7f37fded4088
        0x7f37fded414b
        0x401065
```

Notice it is actually pretty common to trace based on `kstack`s histogram - which is just how Flamegraphs work. 

## P1

The goal is to implement new syscall, `kdlp`, for modern kernel. I've took inspiration from the syscall `pidfd_getfd`. \
Before implementing the syscall itself, I've added the syscall module to the builtin modules within `linux/kernel/Makefile`:

```bash
obj-y     = fork.o exec_domain.o panic.o \
	    cpu.o exit.o softirq.o resource.o \
	    sysctl.o capability.o ptrace.o user.o \
	    signal.o sys.o umh.o workqueue.o pid.o task_work.o \
	    extable.o params.o \
	    kthread.o sys_ni.o nsproxy.o \
	    notifier.o ksysfs.o cred.o reboot.o \
	    async.o range.o smpboot.o ucount.o regset.o ksyms_common.o kdlp.o
```

The following to `include/linux/syscalls.h`:

```c
asmlinkage long sys_kdlp(char __user *buf, size_t size);
```

And the following entry within the syscall table (for x86-64, under `arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl`. for AARCH64, under `include/uapi/asm-generic/unistd.h`), as a common syscall (for both 32, 64):

```bash
452     common	kdlp        sys_kdlp
```

Now, under `linux/kernel`, I've added a new syscall's file - `kdlp.c`:

```c
#include <linux/mm.h>
#include <linux/syscalls.h>
#include <linux/slab.h>
#include <linux/string.h>
#include <linux/sched.h>
#include <linux/minmax.h>
#include <linux/uaccess.h>


static ssize_t kdlp(char __user *buf, size_t size)
{
    int ret;
    const char prefix[] = "@@@Message from itay@@@ Currently running: ";
    size_t max_size = PAGE_SIZE;
    char *result_buf = kzalloc(max_size, GFP_KERNEL);
    if (!result_buf)
    {
        ret = -ENOMEM;
        goto out;
    }

    memcpy(result_buf, prefix, sizeof(prefix));
    get_task_comm(result_buf + strlen(prefix), current);
    size_t count = min(size, max_size);
    if (copy_to_user(buf, result_buf, count) < count)
    {
        ret = -EFAULT;
        goto out_free;
    }

    ret = 0;

out_free:
    kfree(result_buf);
    result_buf = NULL;
out:
    return ret;
}

SYSCALL_DEFINE2(kdlp, char __user *, buf, size_t, size)
{
    int ret;
    if (!buf)
        return -EINVAL;

    ret = kdlp(buf, size);
    return ret;
}
```

Recompiled the kernel:

```bash
cd linux/
make oldconfig
make -j $(nproc)
sudo make -j $(nproc) modules_install install
```






[kfuncs]: https://docs.kernel.org/bpf/kfuncs.html
[assembly-macros]: https://re-eject.gbadev.org/files/GasARMRef.pdf
