---
layout: post
title:  "KDLP - Part 2"
date:   2024-07-01 19:59:45 +0300
categories: jekyll update
---

**Contents**
* TOC
{:toc}
## Lecture 13

Covers character devices - motivation, interaction, implementation.

### Chardevs

Character-by-character kernel interface. Meaning a byte-stream, not buffered, input. For example, keyboard, mouse. But it isn't necessarily related to physical device. \
Character devices can be found under `/dev`, having `c` as file type. Uniquely identified by major (type / category identifier), minor (instance identifier) numbers. Generally, implemented as a kernel module. We can create character (unbuffered) / block (buffered) manually devices via `mknod`. \
Another interesting file is `/proc/devices`, which contains the major to device type mapping. 

### Interaction

Everything is a file. Hence, simple `cat, echo` commands works on the device files. Also syscalls involving fds. 

### Examples

Some useful devices:

```bash
/dev/null  # discard input
/dev/zero  # infinite number of b'\x00' output
/dev/tty   # this terminal, equivalent of R/W from stdin/stdout
/dev/kmsg  # kernel ring buffer access, dmesg parses this
/dev/urandom  # infinite random bytes, crypto-secured
/dev/random  # same, but can block in case system's entropy is low (for example, shortly after boot)
/dev/mem  # Physical memory access!
```

### PRNG Chardev Impl

Demonstration of a basic character device kernel module. We have to perform few steps:

1. Assign major, minor numbers

2. Set file operations - `fops`, that stores addresses of the handlers. 

3. Register device with cdev subsystem

4. Implement handlers for `open, close`

5. Implement handlers for `read, write`

Note: `__init` is a special section of the object, that contains the init functions. It can be reclaimed after module load. 

```c
#include <linux/module.h>
#include <linux/errname.h>
#include <linux/fs.h>
#include <linux/cdev.h>
#include <linux/kdev_t.h>


dev_t major_minor;
size_t minor_count = 10;
struct cdev kdlpdev;

int kdlp_open(struct inode * inode, struct file * file) {
    file->private_data = (void *) 0x4141414142424242;
    return 0;
}

int kdlp_close(struct inode * inode, struct file * file) {
    return 0;
}

ssize_t kdlp_read(struct file * file, char * __user buf, size_t count, loff_t * fpos) {

}

ssize_t kdlp_write(struct file * file, const char * __user buf, size_t count, loff_t * fpos) {
    pr_info("write %d:%d\n", imajor(file->f_inode), iminor(file->f_inode));
    return -EFAULT;
}

struct file_operations fops = {
    .owner = THIS_MODULE,
    .open = kdlp_open,
    .release = kdlp_close,
}

int __init kdlpdev_init(void)
{
    int ret = alloc_chrdev_region(&major_minor, 0, minor_count, "kdlpdev");
    if (ret < 0)
    {
        pr_err("major/minor allocation failure: %d(%s)\n", ret, errname(ret));
    }

    char buf[64];
    pr_info("major:minor = %s\n", format_dev_t(buf, major_minor));

    cdev_init(&kdlpdev, &fops);
    cdev_add(&kdlpdev, major_minor, 1);

    return 0;
}

void kdlp_cleanup(void)
{
    unregister_chrdev_region(major_minor, minor_count);
    cdev_del(&kdlpdev);
}

module_init(kdlpdev_init);
module_exit(kdlpdev_exit);
MODULE_LICENSE("GPL");
```

The major and minor are contained in `dev_t` type, where the CTOR is `MKDEV`, and the getters are `MAJOR, MINOR`. \
We can dynamically allocate the major, minor numbers using `alloc_chrdev_region`, which internally calls `MKDEV`. The static version is `register_chrdev_region`, but it isn't frequently used as collisions between drivers may occur. 

### Necessary Symbols

`struct cdev` - contains the `dev_t`, module owner, `fops` and linked list (for all minors within starting from `dev_t`) and its count, as well as `kobject` for refcounting. 

`struct file_operations` - the function pointers associated with the device. 

`cdev_init` - initializes `cdev`, associates it with a `fops`. 

`cdev_add` - actually adds the `cdev` to the system. It does so by registering the device to the `cdev_map`. 

### Open, Close

`struct inode` - represent information about a file, within certain device, which is represented by the `i_rdev` member. 

`struct file` - encapsulates `struct inode`, and stuff related to the file layer, such as path. 

### Read, Write

We'd use the helper functions `copy_to{from}_user`. Notice the `__user` macro is a syntatic macro, that has no actual runtime effect. \
Notice that EOF is signalled by returning a `0` from the read handler. This can be done, in case `*fpos` passes certain value. 

### Notes

1. Even after unloading the module, and calling the destructor methods, a `kdlpdev` would reside on the non-procfs filesystem. This reference is invalid, and upon performing operations on it - would cause an error. 

2. `file->private_data` usually contains a pointer to a driver-defined struct, which encapsulates the driver's-specific needed datum.

3. Recall we've created devices using `mknod`. Another option is automatic - 

## Lecture 14

### Synchronizing the CPU

The `jiffies` counts CPU timer interrupts since boot, allows calculating time between in-kernel events. The `HZ` kernel config value contains the timer frequency - interrupts per second. 

### Grouping Devices

Each device class groups devices of similar type, defined within `struct class`. By using `class_create`, the desired class would be created under `/sys/class/`. \
As mentioned, device instances can be created manually. We can also instantiate these via device class. While device instance (created by `device_register`) is identified by major/minor pair, device class is identified by name string (creates devices via `device_create`). Both provides sysfs interface. 

### kkey

Kernel keyboard implementation, under `/dev/kkey{0 ... 127}`. We'd interpret the input bytes as MIDI audio bytes, which encodes musical information in events (not stream of audio). \
The driver implementation is as follows:

1. `sys_write` sends either `0` (up) or `1` (down) to one of the 128 keyboard devices, representing different notes. 

2. The input is being interpreted and stored within the module's memory.

3. Upon performing `sys_read`, a valid MIDI file is generated out of the stored bytes, and the cache is cleared. 

The example can be found under `kkey.c`. 

## Lecture 15

### Sysfs - class files

`struct class_attribute` defines the R/W handlers for a class file. 

### Mutex 

We can initialize Mutex either static (`DEFINE_MUTEX`) or dynamically (`mutex_init`). \
In terms of locking, `mutex_lock` is an uninterruptible locking - which shall be used with caution. `mutex_trylock` returns immediately (non-blocking), and `mutex_lock_interruptible` is the general used, which is blocking and suitable for chardevs. Unlocking is done via `mutex_unlock`. \
Notice the locks usage is forbidden under certain contexts: interrupt handlers, and atomic contexts. For these, we'd have to use `spin_lock, spin_unlock`. For "maybe-atomic" contexts, we'd use `spin_lock_irqsave`. 

### Atomic Vars

Initialized with `atomic{,64}_t` and `ATOMIC_INIT`. \
Read with `atomic_read`, write with `atomic_set`. There are also types `atomic_long_t, atomic_ptr_t`. 

## Lecture 16

### Syscall Open

Made of 3 major steps:

1. Wrapper invocation

2. Internal main handler invocation

3. Manipulating fd table

The process specific FDT is defined as `struct files_struct`, accessed via `task_struct->files`. \
The general process starts by resolving a path, performing verifications on the file, and creating an entry in the FDT. 
The FDT is initialized upon a `fork` (or `clone`), using the `copy_files` call. \
An underlying `open` handler is actually wrapped within `vfs_open`, which wraps `fops->open`. 

## Lecture 17

NUMA performance lecture

### Terms

1. Node - a single CPU + local memory DIMM

2. Core - a physical CPU in sillicon, includes execution units, L1 and L2 caches. The L3 cache is shared among multiple cores within the same CPU. 

3. (hardware) Thread - instruction stream execution context, the OS can treat as standalone CPU. x86 enables running 2 hw-threads per core.   

### Data Locality

For maximal performance, local memory access should be used as much as possible. 
In reality, remote memory access is unavoidable. \
In Linux, the scheduler moves tasks around different CPUs to balance the load.
Usually, manual pinning memory + CPU would yield optimal performance. 

### Huge Pages

Page table translation can be an expensive operation. Using 2MB or 1GB huge pages, allow us to shrinken the translation process, as well as covering larger memory areas within the same size TLB. \
The Linux kernel provides 2 mechanism to utilize huge pages:

1. Transparent huge pages (THP) - managed by the kernel, transparent to userspace. 

2. hugetlbfs - applications can allocate these pages themselves

### Cache Coherence Protocols

The content of the caches among different CPUs shall be coherent. \
This can be achieved by coherence protocols, such as the classic MESI. Intel processors use the MESIF protocol, while AMD uses the MOESI. \
Notice that a specific cacheline contention among different CPUs may cause lots of inter-process cache coherence protocol metadata transmission, filling alot of traffic within the bus, limiting bandwidth.
This type of cacheline contention is often referred as bouncing. \
There are two types of such a contention:

1. False cacheline sharing - the CPUs are accessing different independent data, that happen to reside in the same cacheline. Can be identified via `perf-c2c`, and solved by the `__cacheline` attribute / size padding. 

2. Same datum - mostly locks and counters in the kernel. Can be solved with per-cpu variants.

One major challenge with spin locks, was the fact that the spinned lock's cacheline had huge contention by the various CPUs. It has been solved by making waiters to spin over a per-cpu cacheline, instead of the global. 

### qspinlock

`qspinlock` is a queued spinlock, meaning waiters are being appened to a MCS queue. The head waiter spins on the lock cacheline, while the other waiters are spinning on their own per-cpu cachelines. \
Added since kernel 4.12

## Lecture 18

### Close syscall

Two main tasks - invalidate `int fd` index in the FDT, and close `struct file *` if needed. A spinlock is being used to fetch the underlying `struct file`. The reason we wouldn't like to sleep, is to enable atomic contexts and interrupts to call `close`. \
Moreover, `array_index_nospec` is a macro that prevents speculative execution, mitigation against Spectre.
Eventually, `filp_close ` is called, checking the reference count of that file. In case it is `1`, the struct would be freed.

### Filesystem Monitor

The first Linux FS event notification system. Internally, uses signals. \
Obsolete, now using inotify, fanotify or auditd. 

### Posix Locks

Can lock **range** of a file with `fcntl`, using `F_SETLKW`. 

### Future Callback Scheduling

Deferred work we may want to schedule. \
We can check our execution context using (depracated) `in_interrupt` macro, or the new macros `in_task, in_nmi, in_hardirq, in_serving_softirq`. 
Notice kernel threads are treated as process context, without userspace. They can sleep, preempt, scheduled, block, etc.

1. For process context: `init_task_work` wraps the CB, `task_work_add` schedules it. 

2. For any context: `schedule_delayed_work`, to access global queue. 

## Lecture 19

### syscall read

Not too interesting. A cool note is the usage of file position lock. The "meat" of read is actually `vfs_read`. \

## Lecture 20

Guest lecture, OpenShift Virtualization container platform. \
This platform is based on Kubernetes open source project, and maintained by Red Hat. 

### Containers

Process has an owner, address space, access to FS, scheduling and priorities. \
A container might have multiple processes inside, with limitations on FS / address space, memory, CPU, network, etc. A container's image is the defined container's FS. \
Containers run usually on Google's cloud, AWS, Azure, etc. Sometimes, they run on bare metal. 

### Kubernetes

While we can typically run hunderds of containers per Node, we'd like to scale it one step further. We'd like to manage thousands of nodes, running millions of containers. \
Kubernetes was made by Google exactly for this purpose. 

## E2

## P2

